[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we're joined by
Austin federa of the salana foundation
uh very excited to have you on the show
Austin you have uh a really awesome
background uh not only in the salana
ecosystem but you're also the host of
your own
podcast um and you also were with uh the
marketing teams at bison trails and at
Republic and Republic crypto so you have
a kind of vast background in the the
blockchain and crypto space so I'm
really excited to chat with you today
how are you doing I'm good thanks for
having me on yeah um so I kind of want
to jump off the conversation with like a
a bit of a a philosophical shill if you
will um I'm really excited to be
chatting with you because salana kind of
Grose to prominence during the last Bull
Run and it's still this project that's 3
and 1 halfish years old and there is a
lot of adversity uh both from like the
social and kind of like public Outlook
perspective as well as from just like
the network perspective that the
ecosystem has gone under so I'm really
curious to hear what do you think are
some of the kind of like leading lights
or the things that kind of helped keep
the salana ecosystem system uh unified
and together and to really kind of Forge
through uh these trials and tribulations
yeah you know I think if you if you look
at the history of builders on the sauna
Network it has always been and continues
to be today that the folks who pick
salana to build on they pick it for a
reason and they pick it because they
can't build what their vision is on any
other network and that may be due to
innate technical reasons or that may
just be to economic reasons right the
transactions all the salon Network are
cheap fast and abundant that's a charact
that's three words of characteristics
that you can't really say about other
networks um additionally it runs in one
Global State machine and so that means
you don't have to worry about charting
you don't have to worry about layer twos
and threes and layer 47s out into the
future for scalability you don't have to
worry about centralized sequencers you
don't have to worry about multisig like
it is just Salon a network right and so
that combination of things has always
made it a network work where people
building different kinds of applications
come here that can be low-level
applications like something like squads
and fuse which are like multisig and
account abstraction wallets and and all
of that sort of deep technical stuff
that can also be stuff like Jupiter
aggregator which is a defi routing
engine that'll hit half a dozen
marketplaces when you do you know a $10
trade to make sure you're getting the
best price possible on chain that sort
of composability is not possible in
layer 2 ecosystems and it doesn't really
work on networks like ethereum because
the fees are so high that it really
prevents someone from being able to do
that and L2 is fractured liquidity they
fracture State that's the point of an L2
is to fracture the state and to scale a
piece of that state in the process so
you know I I would say that like some
people look at sort of the salana
community especially after the collapse
of FTX last year and are like oh man how
are they going to get through this and
you know from from my perspective and my
position at the salana foundation it was
really never question of will they get
through this who was sort of when is
everyone going to see that the community
is going to come through this just fine
right and that's because the stuff that
is built on salana it's not like it can
just move somewhere else these are
different kinds of applications
different kinds of Founders much more of
a focus on building consumer Focus
consumer ready products um like sling
which launched during breakpoint which
is a peer-to-peer money transfer system
similar to venmo um but it's it's you
know the user interface is you know Head
and Shoulders above anything else you
see in the blockchain space um and these
types of applications really find a home
on the network and that's kind of one of
the things I think that sets the tenor
of the Sala ecosystem apart from other
ecosystems interesting so it's almost
like the technology the underlying
technology in how it differentiates
itself from other blockchain ecosystems
is sort of the stickiness that allows
salana to kind of Thrive during the
rough times oh yeah I mean a core thesis
of mine is that when you create
disruptive scale and disruptive
performance people build applications
you could never even imagine they would
build and you know the classic example
of this is high-speed internet right I
don't think we thought the web of today
was going to come out of the transition
from a 56k modem to a 1 and a half
megabit DSL to a 20 megabit cable line
to 100 megabit fiberoptic connection it
would be pretty hard to look back and
say like oh this social networks are an
obvious effect of us going to from
dialup to DSL Well turns out they kind
of were in retrospect but we didn't
really think that was going to be the
case streaming is another great example
of this I mean the iPhone came out and
it changed dating forever but I don't
think anyone looked at the iPhone and
was like yes Tinder that's what's going
to get built on this platform um and
that's kind of a really big uh
differentiator I would say is that that
drive to say you know transacting on
salana is 10,000 times to 100,000 times
cheaper than other networks and the
transaction capacity is significantly
higher you know it's pushing uh multiple
thousands if not 10, transactions per
second in steady state of the network
today and we're working on projects with
fire dancer that may 10x that from that
standpoint as well and this is sort of
like the compounding of performance is I
I would say like a cultural value that
the folks at salana Labs salana
Foundation at you know fire dancer at
jeto at uh Zig sorry Sig um at mango at
all of these different core contributor
teams hold really you know as a as a
true tenant is like we should make
blockchain as fast and as cheap and as
scalable as humanly possible uh and
everything else sort of is Downstream
from that this is the same sort of
compounding that tsmc used to make
itself the you know the Fab in the world
that literally no one else can compete
with because they can do things no one
else can because they focused much more
on improving technology than improving
profit margin yeah I love that
perspective um like have your Mission
Vision uh at the technological kind of
solidified so that the builders can kind
of come into the ecosystem and all align
based off of that it's very um objective
and fact-based and rational which is
something that I think anyone in the
crypto space can enjoy especially if
you've been here for a few years um so
I'm actually really curious before we
start digging into a lot of the great
kind of topics you just brought up um
what was your Genesis into blockchain
and crypto in general do you remember
the first time you heard about Bitcoin
or ethereum or any other network um and
what was kind of your initial thoughts
when you first stumbled across this
asset class in Industry so I bought some
Bitcoin in college back in like probably
2011 or something and I think it was on
Mount GAA and it just completely
disappeared right and that was back at
the time when like Bitcoin storage was
not easy they were like ah buy this
encrypted hard drive it costs $120 I'm
like I'm in college this sucks like I'm
just going to do I I'll write it down
somewhere and of course like you lose
the thing you write down um but then
coming back back around in 2017 I was
working for a fintech company that was
trying to Pivot into basically building
a borrow lend token on ethereum although
we wouldn't call it defi at the time it
was sort of very early precursors of
defi that company ended up basically
going bankrupt a few months later as a
startup but you know from there I was
bit by the bug of like okay smart
contracts like software development in a
decentralized manner for Global networks
like there's something interesting here
and I don't know what it is cuz back in
like there weren't that many interesting
things built on blockchain right this is
with the very very early beginnings of
Def were starting to emerge but other
than that it was like here's a smart
contract on ethereum you can use it for
practically nothing but conceptually
it's very cool right and as we know like
ethereum changed the world right um but
from there I went on and worked at
Republic where I ran marketing for
Republic I launch Republic crypto with
them um which was a great experience you
know we did a bunch of like crazy stuff
in that market cycle leading up to the
collapse and even sort of after that
2018 collapse uh then worked for a few
stealth infrastructure companies for a
few years and then joined bison Trails
um where I worked on product marketing
there and product uh up until their
acquisition by coinbase at the end of
2020 and so um you got acquired uh why
didn't you want to stick around with
bison was it sort of like a acquisition
and then kind of gutting um or were you
just like ready to look on look into
something else yeah there were some
layoffs in the process as happens in
pretty much every acquisition um because
bison Trails got folded in wholesale to
coinbase and became coinbase Cloud which
it still is today but you know I think
for me the idea of going to work for a
really large publicly traded company
even one that's doing blockchain stuff
it didn't seem as interesting to me I
think that the the work that's being
done on the Forefront of blockchain is
not being done at exchanges it's being
done at protocols and it just seemed
like a really great time to actually go
work for you know either a layer two
that was being built or one of the quote
alt l1s uh those was up and coming at
the time uh and salana was not actually
even on my list um at bison Trails I'd
worked with over 30 different
protocols uh and at that point I wasn't
really seriously looking at salana I was
looking at a bunch of other layer ones
and layer twos um but a guy I used to
work with Ben spango um hit me up and
said hey I just joined Salon labs from
multicoin um you know I'd hired him at
Republic and he's like you should you
should come and talk with us and I was
like I don't know like I haven't heard
anything about salono like it just seems
like a weird fast Network that's doing
other that's doing things that no one
seems to agree on he's like yes that's
the point come talk to Raj and toie and
so I got on a call with them and 30
hours later we had a signed offer letter
um I was really taken with to's vision
for one Global State machine for all of
the problems that were going to arise in
charting which were all subsequently
true um and the L2 architecture to me it
didn't make sense to fracture the state
in this way and so you know it's been
almost uh three years at this point so
it's been a been a great time here yeah
that's awesome actually really oh sorry
I was just gonna say um I've been having
a really fun time kind of digging into
validated your podcast um and listen to
to the most recent episode um and it's
kind of shocking how um tribalism can
kind of put people's blinders on when it
comes to a network um you know from the
outset if you like I cut my teeth in the
Neo ecosystem and I've been um covering
that blockchain project and all the
projects building on it since 2018 um so
I'm very um in tune with why one would
want to go work for like an L1
especially at a foundation level um but
you kind of hear these tidbits and these
sound bites and nobody really kind of
looks into what's really going on in an
ecos system so I think that that's kind
of really fascinating you got to join
salana Foundation at an early time when
it was unknown you had this like super
rise to prominence um and then an equal
kind of like fall with like a negative
association with a bad actor in the
space but decentralized networks are
decentralized so what kind of during the
I I would argue that 2021 to 2022 uh you
had the highs and the lows what were
kind of the things that kept you
grounded um while you're experiencing
this kind of meteoric rise in popularity
token number went up like crazy and then
you had this equal and opposite reaction
um so you had to kind of really be
grounded um cuz my dad likes to say
don't ride your high is too high or your
lows too low so what was kind of the The
Guiding Light That kind of kept you um
stable during during the rise and kind
of like the negative perception cuz I
don't want to say fall I think has a
phenomenal um narrative that's
reemerging so so like to say fall is
wrong but during a negative time I mean
I would say there was a fall right I I
would say that um you know if you look
at December January and uh November and
December of of 20122 like user activity
dropped you know investor confidence
went to zero um you know the the the
real true Testament there are that no
teams left salana there were no
technical teams that left the network at
that time the the there were there were
a few nft projects that left but nft
projects are portable anyway they don't
really care what blockchain they're on
besides from an economic perspective but
the developers who were building on the
network they really were like oh no this
this technology has not gotten any worse
uh since November right if anything it's
gotten much better and so their
willingness to stick it out their
willingness to say like look the this is
uh what we're going through is is is
terrifying but at the same time like
this is the place where I can build my
vision as a founder and you know I'm I'm
sure a bunch of them did diligence about
like what would it look like if we move
to another chain and they all sort of
came to the conclusion of like we really
can't build what we want to build there
we've got to really be building it on
salana um and so you know seeing the
community come together and have that
sort of resolve to get through this was
was incredibly powerful I would say kind
of on a on a personal note um a mistake
I see a lot of people making in this
space is they join a network they think
is going to be worth a lot of money and
it's one of the worst mistakes you can
make I mean so many times in my career
if I had been optimizing for money if
I'd been optimizing for what was the
highest expected return at the time I
would have made a decision that uh would
have either been a negative or at least
would have been significantly less uh
you know at the time all of the cool
sexy networks you know at the time that
bison Trails got acquired it was not
salana a bunch of other networks now
that like salana is significantly higher
in the market cap ratings then um but
what I saw you know at the time in in
January of 21 saying you know to talking
with Raj and toy was like I really
believe in this technology stack I think
this is the right way to build a
blockchain that's meant to be you know
web scale it's meant to fit all of the
users of the world in one Global State
machine and even if the actual business
doesn't work out I'm going to learn a
ton being part of this organization and
going through this like why journey
together with them and you know what
like it worked stuff worked um and the
adoption numbers you know started
kicking in and this was sort of what we
saw through this and so you know I don't
want to make it sound like it's easy
right it it's it is um it is very hard
to be at an organization at a company
that everyone says is like you know all
the Twitter threaders are saying Salon
is doomed salon's over Salo will never
go above $2 again like the networks's
going to zero right and this was also
like we'd seen this happen with Tera
just like a few months earlier it was
not impossible that a network could fail
and it could never recover from that um
now salana had you know a lot going for
it as a general computer environment
that really had no peer at the time and
I think still doesn't today but you know
it is hard to stay grounded in those
moments it's scary um you have to take a
lot of walks you got to make sure you're
going outside right if you're just like
it's so easy to war room when you're
going through something like this but
like this is this is one of those things
that I think um folks underestimate is a
an Emergency is exhilarating right it's
not great but emergency is like your
adrenaline kicks in like 48 Hours 72
hours let's go let's do this thing when
it's a four month slog and a slow
decline in token price and you know like
everyone's telling you something's over
that is much mentally harder on folks I
will say at the foundation we had zero
attrition though we we we you know
everyone who worked here even though we
all got job offers from other networks
like sometimes even the day after which
was a little rude um you know there we'd
all get job offers that are like Oh Come
work at X or Y or Z Network because they
recognized the the talent of folks who
are building on this network and I think
we had no we had no attrition to other
networks we had a few folks who left for
their own personal reasons but it's not
like they went to you know a competitive
blockchain or something along those
lines and I think if if in November
of last year you had told me this is
where we'll be a year later I would not
have believed you um even though there
was no doubt in my mind and the doubt in
the minds of like most folks building on
salana that like the network would
recover uh I think the the the pace of
this recovery has been really impressive
to watch and see and it's in credit
entirely to the builders it's entirely
because the pace of companies building
on salana is just ship ship ship and
they're building stuff you don't see
anywhere else mhm mhm and I think in the
most recent validator Health Report
which by the way is awesome um I would
love to see more ecosystems go into this
um you know I've been in in the
blockchain space full-time since 2018
and like to to see the the Nakamoto
coefficient like to learn these new
things this is why I love the space um
so I want to kind of delve into that a
little bit but you've brought up this uh
term a couple times and I just want to
make sure that our listeners who might
not be as degenerate as you and I are
are on the same page when you're really
kind of like um entranced by this idea
of the global State machine can you just
kind of like Eli 5 like an elevator
pitch um what that really means and
maybe because we also spoke about like
the bifurcation that l2s do with
ethereum and splitting up the ability
for for an L2 and an L1 to agree on the
same state can we just also kind of like
touch upon that yeah so one global State
means that for lack of a better term all
of the data is in the same database
right so if what you're talking about
here is like you know from from a
consumer version it's sort of all your
files and folders are locally stored on
your computer right uh and so what this
means is that stuff can establish trust
it can read directly from other programs
other state on the network and this is
really important because it means every
program is the ability to determine what
is true based on an objective data set
which is the single Global State machine
and to be clear this is Bitcoin Bitcoin
runs in one Global State uh ethereum
used to run in one Global State as well
uh this is what made ethereum so
powerful is that a smart contract could
go from one defi application to another
defi application to another defi
application this is the whole concept of
like a flash loan a flash loan does not
work unless you can trust every piece of
State in the system and so uh that
that's kind of the the core thesis of
salana is that uh synchronize all of the
world's information at as close to the
speed of light as possible in one Global
State and that's how Jupiter aggregator
works that's how all these different
systems work that have to touch multiple
pieces of state and there's a few things
in the way Salon is built that make that
really easy to do and we can get into
some of that later if you want but l2s
are different l2s are creating a copy of
blockchain and they're basically saying
a whole group of trans actions will just
execute in this environment and a bunch
will just be here and a bunch will just
be here and the analogy here is sort of
like if you have multiple Banks right or
if you have like you if you have your
money in chase you can't go to Bank of
America and say hey give me a loan
they're going to be like no your money's
in a different bank move your money to
us and then we'll give you a loan or you
know you can't just take a you know I
can't like a post from Facebook on
Twitter that's just something that can't
happen because they're two separate
pieces of State in two separate
applications that are not actually
connected to one another and yes you can
build transfer systems like I can move
money from a Chase account to a Bank of
America account but it takes time it
involves trust I have to trust that the
bank is actually moving that money and
you know when it comes to blockchain
trust is a dirty word right trust is not
what you want you want to know things
for certain you don't want to have to
trust a bridge you don't want to have to
wait for things to move from one piece
of state to another and so this is kind
of a very big architectural difference
between salana and other networks yeah
and um it sounds like the whole
ecosystem is quite sticky when one app
can verify the state um according to
another apps so this brings up all sorts
of questions with of interoperability
with other networks but um we'll touch
upon that in a little bit um I do want
to kind of dig into the validator Health
Report because there's a lot of really
kind of cool information that came out
of that at least it was quite
enlightening for me like I hadn't
realized how decentralized the validator
network was for salana and that this
includes itself two separate validator
sets um a consensus node and an RP in
RPC nodes so you have like a breath
there uh the introduction of the
Nakamoto coefficient which essentially
uh determines um what percentage of
validators need to be compromised for
the network to be compromised itself um
and then also just kind of the
geographic distribution of where the
validator nodes are and then a little
bit about the client so I want to talk
uh the multiple clients um that are
arising out of the salon ecosystem so I
kind of want to talk a little bit about
all of that but first let's um talk
about the geographic distribution of of
the nodes because in decentralization
it's a spectrum you don't always need a
centralized solution you don't always
need a decentralized solution and then
there's also various different types of
Spectra within decentralization there's
governance there's Geographic there's
token um distribution at the foundation
level versus how many retail owners have
it so with all that kind of verbal mind
dump um what's kind of your main
takeaway or the thing that really kind
of solidifies where the direction of the
network is going from the most recent
report that did come out in October um
So based off of all that what do you
want to talk about first yeah so I mean
let me just start with the validator
health reports in general so Amir valani
who's our head of public policy puts
these together about every 6 months and
we started doing these because uh people
didn't know right there was an
assumption that there were 60 Salon of
validators or some tiny validator set um
and that's true for many other networks
right uh there are very small sets of
validators for a lot of these
blockchains that exist salana is closer
to ethereum than you know any of these
other networks and that's kind of the
point of these reports is to put out an
objective highly cited data driven
report that says here's the current
state of the network the good the bad
the ugly and also here are all of the
citations so you can go fact check this
don't take our word for it go check
these data sources yourself um and this
was you know it's weird that this is not
common in blockchain it's it's very
strange how like you have investor
reports and you have these sort of price
Target reports that come out but very
few people actually go through and put
out like an objective report on the
network level of a lot of these
blockchains so we're like let's do it
how do we make anyone take us seriously
aggressive citations and you know it's
funny Amir actually has like a you know
she's she's our head of public policy
but she has like a government background
she worked in the Obama White House like
you know she's very used to having to
site every single source that comes in
and so we get these really compelling
but also easy to read reports that that
come out and so part of that process
includes us internally deciding what do
we think are important metrics people
should know Nakamoto coefficient tells
one story and it's an important story
it's the number of entities you have to
compromise in order to disrupt the
operations of the network on salana it's
about 24 I believe today um on you know
something like ethereum it's also about
20 because of Lio right there's 20 Lio
operators and if they all collude that's
over 33% of the eth stake um and you can
get the 51% too with Lio and you know
that gets to about 25 if you're using
that metric uh stake distribution around
the world is another one you don't want
too much stake in any one country
because if a country turned off all
those nodes right like if the United
States was like we've banned blockchain
tomorrow and and you know isps and
everyone in data centers and start
blocking uh blockchain connections it
doesn't matter if everyone's running a
node at home they're still running it
through the Verizon ISP and at that
point like if the ISP is blocking it
that's it right so geographic
distribution matters um the other piece
that matters a lot is validator client
diversity so so salana has two validator
clients today um which actually share a
lot of the similar codebase uh there's
the salana labs validator client and
then jeto makes a validator client
that's a Mev optimized client and jeto
code is probably 90% similar to slol
Labs code so it provides social
robustness but not necessarily technical
robustness for the technical client
diversity um there's a major project
underway called fire dancer um which
jump Trading Group is is building and
that is a total rewrite of the validator
client in C uh it's a much more
performant validator client um you know
early benchmarks are 10 to 100x faster
on a lot of the key components uh that
just hit testnet um so you know who
knows maybe in a year we'll see it on
mainnet as well uh additionally to that
there's um a client being written um in
the language of uh of Zig and that
client is called Sig uh which is syndic
is building that as well so it's really
interesting and cool to see all these
different new validator clients getting
built um and this is kind of a major
Mark of decentralization and growing up
for the Sal ecosystem um today only
Bitcoin and ethereum have two
independent validator clients and soon
salana will uh join those ranks uh so
what is the language that the original
Salon Labs incubated client is running
on top of because you did mention that
that uh I believe it's jeto um is
running in C right now so um having yeah
fire danc is in C uh the current client
is in Rust rust okay perfect yeah
because having uh diversity in clients
if there's um a bug in one of the
clients then the other the other client
might not be impacted or affected by
that and for listeners who might not be
too in the weeds essentially a client
acts as an operating system for a
blockchain ecosystem so when you can
have a game running on Windows and Apple
if there's a major bug in your windows
version you can still play on your Apple
version that's kind of for the nonte
person that's kind of how I've deduced
it um another kind of interesting uh
similarity uh that that you and I have
and and that I'm kind of picking up at
Salon Labs is my previous career I was
an urban planner um I worked in various
different governments so what do you
think is the kind of benefit that having
um I was a technocrat but it sounded
like um some other folks at salana Labs
might have been in positions where folks
were elected so what do you think this
kind of um background in public policy
or maybe in the public domain um in
traditional governance structures what
is the benefit that you think that that
brings to such an industry that values
computer science folks and um like
previous Finance folks yeah I'm not sure
we have anyone who is actually properly
elected but we definitely have folks who
worked in political offices and
political appointments right the
executive branch uh but you know I think
I I said this a bunch that some of the
hardest problems for blockchain over the
next 10 years are not technical they're
social right it's it's that the you know
at this point we kind of know what
blockchains need to do in order to scale
and it's just work it's not inventing
new computer science it's a lot of hard
software engineering but it's
fundamentally just work the social
consensus piece is much harder I don't
think there's any Network that has truly
good onchain governance today um I think
salana does a pretty decent job but like
you know Bitcoin is kind of run by just
the core maintainer groups like it's
actually very hard to engage with a lot
of these blockchains on a governance
level so that's a huge social component
of this too um you know Lio running a
huge percentage of ethereum stake is
another social issue it's not a
technical issue they could pretty easily
write some code into the contract that
says like no operators can have over
this much percentage there's a lot of
things that actually require social
Solutions as opposed to Technical
Solutions how do you decide what new
features should be included in the
latest release of the salana blockchain
now that you have three independent
teams building validator clients that's
a human problem that's a governance
problem that's a that's a messy problem
right and so those are the muscles I
think that like the foundation is really
helping the ecosystem build up at this
point it's not you know oh all the
smartest Engineers work for SLO labs and
like they're building stuff for the
ecosystem quite the opposite at this
point um it is it is more that we have
to help a lot of folks who are deeply
technical figure out how you build
social consensus around new ideas and
this is where um I think she died a few
years ago but Elanor Ostrom and her work
on uh common pool resource management
and Collective governance of
organizations is really important I
think for the blockchain space she was
sort of a uh she she won the Nobel prize
in economics for her for her work on
sort of solving the tragedy of the
commons problem um and it's incredibly
uh pertinent research and work I think
to the the problem of building and
maintaining blockchains do you do you
think that um taking these kind of new
studies and applying them in which ways
whichever ways you can at the the
consensus layer the human consensus
layer the social the layer zero if you
will I think that's what the bank list
guys have kind of been pushing for for
that kind of term for that um do do you
think that you're seeing progress in
this way and I only ask this because um
if you look back to the 2016 elections
here in the states that was a highly
divisive time everybody hated Trump but
only 50% of America voted so you still
have these issues where it's a you have
to educate people but then B you still
have to get them to to put their boots
on the ground and come to the to the
voting booth so are you seeing that
these kind of new and innovative ways in
which you're looking at introducing
governance are you seeing traction
amongst like the retail salana hodlers
or is this still more at like the
validator layer where you have more of a
relationship with the folks who are uh
securing the salon Network yeah I mean
you know the US elections are always an
interesting one because other countries
don't have this problem other countries
other democracies have lots of people
vote there's two very easy ways to solve
this a reverse pull tax is the easiest
way to solve this hey people to vote the
other version is you pay is you charge
people who don't vote right these are
actually like economically very easy to
solve this problem socially uh we are
incentivized not to have everyone vote
right both political parties benefit if
only the most radical voters vote and
both political parties actually hate
swing voters right swing voters are the
problem they're unpredictable everyone
else you can plug into a mathematical
model and you can say if I pump x amount
of AD dollars into this market I'll get
my base to turn out right democrat or
republican swing voters are different
right and so this is this is kind of
where uh you know both parties benefit
from from telling uh people that it
doesn't matter if you vote because you
know your vote is just one in 300
million um which is like of course not
true if you live in a swing state me in
New York yeah my vote is pretty useless
right like we know how New York's going
to vote every time it's fine if you're
uh you know if you're in a deep red
State same thing uh there's you know
seven or 10 states where 70,000 votes
decided the election uh both in 20120
and in uh 2016 and yeah that sort of to
go off that deviation right like there
there are deep entrenched social reasons
that our electoral system is set up the
way it is these are not technical
problems to go full circle in this these
are social problems right so what does
that mean right I think if you look at
like blockchain blockchain governance
and like where things are with a network
like
um it takes time to build up those
muscles and I think the other piece is
that you need an informed electorate
right and and if you have an informed
electorate you're going to get better
decision-making what does that mean in
blockchain joeo who holds a bunch of
tokens that he bought on binance and has
never moved to a ledger like I don't
really know if that person has a
particularly interesting take on what
the future of Bitcoin or salana or
ethereum should be um that being said
there you know there are many other
folks uh who do care passionately and
maybe actually hold very few tokens
because they are just not rich
individuals but they have great ideas
for how the stuff can work and this is
where I think Solana's governance
framework is pretty interesting so
validators actually vote on governance
as opposed to stakeholders and so the
cool piece here is like if I delegate my
tokens to a validator that validator
then votes on you know what new version
to adopt and feature activate ation and
so activating a new feature on the
network or upgrading to a new version
requires 80% of the stake weight to
adopt the new software version and so
what that means is you know I made to
have no informed opinions on what the
governance of the sonuna network should
be but you know there's this guy on
Twitter that I really like and he runs a
validator and I'm going to delegate my
tokens to his validator because I
actually think that like yeah he's got
he makes a lot of good points I think
he's probably a person I would trust to
vote in myad on you know new features
and new adoptions on this network and I
think that's probably not ideal but it's
better than any other system I've seen
to date and we'll figure it out over
time right this is the whole thing about
like democracy is the worst form of
government apart from all the
rest what's the um so two things uh what
are the types what's like the scale of
what gets voted on um so in the Neo
ecosystem where I'm a I'm my team is a
council member so some of things that we
might vote on are like Network
parameters to reduce the price of gas
for transaction fees um so are the the
scope of what gets voted on is it
technical in that way or is it also
social um like maybe increasing rewards
for saking to a validator node um and
and so uh firstly that uh and then
secondly um how easy is it to kind of
just migrate from one validator to
another cuz like in the cosmos ecosystem
there's an unbonding period so let's say
suddenly my favorite validator node in
the salon ecosystem uh I don't agree
with their perspectives and opinions and
I want to migrate to another validator
node what how quick is that process yeah
so the unbonding period on salana is one
Epoch which is about 2 and a half to 3
days so it's a pretty quick unbonding
that's enough time where you know
there's there votes that are votes are
not less than that much time right for
the most part um in terms of what is
actually gone through you know it's a
lot of implicit governance it's not
exactly explicit governance so implicit
governance is sort of to say here's
what's in this release if everyone
adopts it we can do a feature activation
and beforehand there's sort of been a
lot of calls and you know discussions on
GitHub through the simy process about
like what would a change be so for
example the first real thing the SAA
Network voted on was to turn on uh
staking rewards and inflation right and
that required 80% of the stake weight
adopting a new software version that
included that feature and then at the
end so if you hit 80% in one Epoch at
the end of that Epoch the feature will
automatically be activated and it will
take effect in the next EPO so it's it's
a you know it's basically a system where
uh you know if folks thought that was a
bad decision they just wouldn't install
the software and then as long as it
stays less than 80% adopting it um the
feature cannot be activated on the
network even if 66% which is a you know
super majority of the network uh they
would have to actively hard fork in
order to do something like that so it's
a pretty interesting um system in terms
of you know other types of of things
that might get added um there's a really
robust technical discussion that takes
place both in Discord and in GitHub
about things like you know how should
local fee markets be added or adopted
right things like that as we go through
the network um they go through a lot of
technical diligence and and some of
those things I would say are indirect
changes to the economic model right like
adding local fee markets adds priority
fees priority fees change the economics
of running a validator they make it
slightly more profitable and it also
slightly increases the amount of burn of
tokens on the network because priority
fees can also be burned and so or you
know half of them can be burned and so
that creates you know new sort of
economic system like incentives but it's
same economic system at the base layer
if someone was going to say we want to
divert 10% of all burned tokens to you
know a uh retroactive public goods fund
or quadratic voting for uh sorry not
quadratic voting quadratic funding like
uh you know Cubix or something like that
that would need to go through you know a
validator vote for that process to
happen those sort of changes can't just
be pushed through yeah and so there's
also another interesting uh line that I
want to hear your insights on um there
is so block zero is a validated
conference for the validators in the
salana ecosystem so what does the
relationship with salana Labs look like
with the validators because it still is
only just a three-year-old Network and
maybe you want to Foster these sort of
relationships so that the validators are
on the same node with uh on the same um
page with with Labs or is Labs just kind
of providing uh like a resource and
maybe validators want to kind of take
part in What labs has to offer I'm just
like really curious to hear those
relationships so the network operators
have by far the most insight into what
is actually happening with the
infrastructure so salana labs and salana
Foundation do not run block producing
validators on the network it is entirely
a community-run network to that effect
and so folks like Brian long from from
Triton um they provide really invaluable
insights and feedback into like what is
it like to run 50 validators right um
they find problems they report bugs they
propose fixes they have you know hey we
really need these kind of tools and this
kind of optionality like it is the
validators who basically said look we
need flow control on packet inest and
raw UDP just isn't cutting it because we
can't you know manage ourselves against
like a distributed Den denial of service
attack that's where quick came from
right as a as a networking technology to
replace raw UDP and so the validators
are really driving a lot of the
operational side forward um in terms of
like what the requirements are for that
stuff I mean some of the recent changes
to how the accounts database is managed
dropped Ram requirements by Forex right
and that was because validators were
basically saying hey like a ton of the
the RAM usage is just this accounts
database there's got to be a better
place to store this than just Ram is
nvme fast enough and you know it took a
few Engineers like a year to get that
all working but the answer is like yeah
totally we can do this in fast SSD
storage as opposed to doing it in Ram
that's still fast enough uh ssds are
much cheaper than Ram so like this is a
win for everyone on the network and so
you know there's those sorts of insights
that really you know the engineering
work is not necessarily done by the
validators but the the the IDE ideation
the concepting a lot of that really does
come from the validator community yeah I
guess cuz your validators are ultimately
like the first user um they represent
the folks who who stake to them so they
themselves are like super users um and
this also gives them an opportunity to
kind of voice the opinion of like the
people we're building for in blockchain
which is you know take our titles aside
for what we do they're basically you and
me you know like folks who are
interested in in technology um one of
the things that I found of that if you
look up at a very surface level why
people don't like salana is because
there might be uh High technical
requirements for running a validator so
can you just share some insights into um
like if I'm a mom and pop kind of you
know person who works at home and is
interested in running a validator am I
going to be able to um and also what are
the the pros and cons with maybe
Outsourcing that to like a third-party
data center yeah so salana the main
technical requirement is bandwidth um
salana is a high throughput high
performance blockchain and that
necessitates higher data rates and data
transfers and so you know if you have
Fiber Optic internet that's you know 700
Meg symmetric you're fine right and
that's actually a lot of people nowadays
around the world do have that that tier
of internet connection and you can run a
validator at home just fine you know
from a hardware perspective it's
probably $2,500 $3,000 of Hardware if
you want to buy it all and run it at
home yourself um plenty of people do
lots of people do that but like at the
end of the day like a lot of the folks
who run validators have a business use
case to run that validator either
because they have enough tokens that it
makes economic incense to run a
validator as opposed to delegating it
out or you know their business requires
them to run nodes for a various you know
whatever reason it requires them to and
so there's definitely home home
operators who run their own nodes too um
so that that's an option I think the
less people run nodes at home in all of
blockchain then that you you'd believe
on Twitter right I think half of eth
nodes are run in data centers and
businesses um you know and a lot of the
other ones are like we forget the devops
overhead right everyone's like oh I can
buy a raspberry 4 and I can you know run
a note on it it's like gu you can but
you have to update the software up
pretty often like if you if you have it
running on auto update like there's no
point in running a node at home right
like the minute you are just sort of
blindly accepting all the software that
comes your way and installing it um like
as if it's like an Apple software update
like you've given up that sense of
running your own node and I think that's
a a piece that people skim over very
quickly now the downsides of running in
a data center are that you may have to
move right the data center could change
its policies and say like actually like
here's a 30-day notice we don't want
blockchain stuff in our data center
anymore but there's over 240 data
centers all around the world that people
run salana infrastructure in which is
the most broad-based distribution of any
network in terms of data center adoption
and so what that means is there's a ton
of options available for for folks who
want to do that you can also run a note
at home you can also run a node at your
business right there's lots of
optionality there um and so that has
contributed to salana having pretty
great geographic distribution pretty
great data center distribution there are
more as a there there are a higher
percentage of ethereum nodes run in AWS
than there is any sort of single
consolidation for the salana network and
folks don't seem concerned about that I
don't think they should be concerned
about that but it's always been strange
to me that they're concerned about it
when it comes to salana but they're not
concerned about it when it comes to
ethereum yeah that's I think one of
ethereum's dirty little secrets that if
AWS goes down then the network is going
to be running into a lot of issues um
and so another kind of like key phrases
that I hear in your conversations that
we've had in this conversation is high
throughput low latency so does and and I
also um being objective and fair uh
salana had some downtime Network
downtime is um and and also on the other
uh side of that coin in Q2 2023 there
was 100% uptime so there were solutions
that were presented is this um technical
requirement to provide infrastructure
for high throughput low latency was this
kind of what the root of the issue was
for the network downtimes um from like a
technical perspective what were kind of
these issues that salana as an ecosystem
was able to address and move past the
vast majority were just bugs in the code
right systems that had not been subject
to a certain level of traffic that then
were subject to it and fell over and the
good news is that's just work right
that's not like there's a fundamental
architectural problem um you know one of
the times the network went down uh nodes
were getting 80 gbits of traffic sent to
them by an attacker right that's enough
to take down a lot of data centers right
let alone loone like good luck on your
home node running that right so the one
exception here are local fee markets so
local fee markets were a new feature
added to the salana network um before
that salana had no fee markets and so
local fee markets are similar to the
global fee markets on ethereum or other
networks except instead of one fee for
everything that is the same for every
user um salana has differentiated fee
markets depending on what you're trying
to do this is because on salana
transactions are abundant on ethereum
transactions are very scarce so you're
competing to land any transaction
whereas on salana you're competing to
land a specific transaction that
specific transaction could be an nft
mint right nft mints have to go
sequentially and so because of that you
could see a situation where I really
want to make sure I get to Mint this nft
so I'm willing to spend $10 to send a
transaction or you know realistically on
salana 15 cents um compared to the 0.
025 it normally cost to send a
transaction um so that's kind of that
was the main one where there was
actually like a new technological
feature added um we talked about quick
from a new networking technology as well
which really helped stuff and the last
is Sak weighted qos uh which is sort of
a stake weighted prioritization of
inbound transaction systems that exist
and so those sort of three pieces and
then just a ton of small performance
improvements under the hood um um you
know some of those to turbine which is
the block propagation engine have really
resulted in 116 which is the current
release of the network you know it is
the most stable release we've ever
released for the network it is the
fastest um it is the smoothest I think
folks have really noticed how much
snappier an already Snappy network was
uh with 116 coming out and so that keeps
the network at 400 milliseconds of
finality which is pretty impressive yeah
very impressive um something that I am
kind of Blown Away by what you guys are
able to do at the foundation level is
attract these kind of large scale names
that like my dad knows like Shopify and
Visa so I want to talk a little bit
about these like really rad Partnerships
that you guys have been able to
establish in the past couple months or
probably you were able to announce in
the past couple months the The Roots
probably run deep with these
relationships so um I think something
that really excites me and from like a
number go up degenerate this isn't going
to be sexy but like stable coins are the
number one killer use case for
cryptocurrency and salana recently um
had USD begin minting on the chain or
maybe it's it's been not recently maybe
it's been about a year there's a lot of
tether and circle activity on the Chain
so from the foundation's perspective how
did this relationship with circle start
and what does that look like now um
after they've been here for a while and
now you're starting to see Circle be
implemented with things like Shopify and
and maybe even verifying Visa
transactions yeah so usdc I think I
think they adopted salana in 2020 so
usdc has been natively available in
salana for for quite a long time at this
point and it's the it's the number two
or three in terms of issuance of usdc
across all networks which is pretty
awesome to see there's a lot of stable
coins on salon like a lot of stable coin
activity there's a ton of stable coin
activity because the network is cheap
and fast right those are the two things
you really need because if you think
about it like everyone talks about
payments as blockchain's killer feature
but if it costs $2 to send a transaction
and you have to wait five minutes for
confirmation that is not competitive
right you might as well mail a check um
and so you know at that point like this
is where a network like salana is really
well suited to payments now being well
suited to payments means it's well
suited to gaming it's well suited to
social uh media networks it's well
suited to basically anything that
requires a lot of transactions that
settle very quickly for a very low fee
there's a ton of stuff that falls into
that category and so you know Visa uh is
has announced that they're scaling their
pilot program um which was USD
settlement um via usdc between Merchant
Banks and the Visa main account and you
know they were originally doing this on
ethereum and they sort of cut their
teeth on ethereum and they were like
okay we're ready to scale this project
and they looked around for is that
through an L2 is that through a
different L1 and in the end Visa chose
to scale that pilot program through
salana and that's a real endorsement of
salana Technology um and that's like one
of the really cool things for us to see
From shopify's perspective they're like
look we make our money by charging 1% of
all transactions that a user makes on uh
Shopify so whether you're using a credit
card you're using PayPal you're using
usdc and salana we actually don't care
what payment method you're using we get
our fees irrespective of that what they
care about is maintaining a good user
experience they don't want to turn on
payment gateways that are going to be
cumbersome and slow and require a bunch
of you know weird things to get to to
work correctly and so from their
perspective they they really like um
usdc on salana because it is approved
you know or complete approved is
probably the wrong term the transaction
completes in the same amount of time it
takes a credit card to approve a
transaction so from a user perspective
it's just a Snappy paying with usdc as
it is American Express or VISA yeah
that's awesome um major congratulations
to to the foundation and to the
ecosystem these are awesome Partnerships
and just uh you know when when you have
large scale entities coming to an
ecosystem like this I think it's it's
point and case that there's something
successful going on so
um that feel great we have like a few
minutes and a few other things I want to
talk about even though I would love to
just double down on stable coins and
visa and and what this partnership looks
like but uh you guys recently celebrated
your third breakpoint we did yes so um
what was the vibe like there because we
are just now I've gone on the record
stating that I think we're now in a bull
market but um regardless of of that
sentiment we are exiting uh 2021 and
2022 which had negative sentiment um we
lost a lot of new market entrance from
2020 and 2021 because they got wrecked
um and they didn't realize that maybe
this is a badge of honor that you have
to own before you can really make it in
in web 3 um so what was the vibe of
attendees at breakpoint were you seeing
retail there were you seeing Builders
were you seeing VCS were you seeing
Enterprise folks were you seeing
government who were the types of of
attendees that were at this event and
with you going there and and walking
away what's kind of like how do you feel
about the ecosystem and just moving
forward in general yeah I mean there
were very few tourists at breakpoint
2023 I mean 2021 was like tourist
central right the network was was
humming it it just like hit really high
valuation marks on you know market cap
and and so there were a lot of tourists
there and this year it was a amazing
combin of developers Founders
researchers from other ecosystems who
are curious about salana Enterprise
folks who are working on you know
blockchain adoption for their big
company and their Enterprise um and then
you know folks who are really Salon
curious who have maybe been in other
ecosystems for a number of years but we
starting to look at salana more
seriously I think the most famous of
these is run from maker right the
co-founder of maker uh was on stage at
breakpoint talking about how he thinks
the svm may be the right architecture to
build the future of maker on and that
doesn't mean maker is leaving ethereum
but like he sees the Power of the svm as
as you know an architecture for the
future of this that also includes people
like Justin bonds who is a you know has
been a Critic of salana for a long time
but sort of over the last year has
really um reversed his thesis and said
the network made a lot of improvements
and now he's a fan of how the network
works uh David Hoffman from bankless uh
recorded an episode with Anatolia and I
breakpoint and you know Bank the one of
the guys from bankless Ventures was
meeting with potential Investments at
the conference as well so I think what
we really see is like a lot of the very
sort of serious people who are focused
on building and investing showed up at
breakpoint this year and it was really
the strongest breakpoint conference
we've we've ever had um all the videos
are available online on the SAA YouTube
channel I highly recommend going through
and looking at the ones that are
interesting to you um there's a lot of
really great information this year that
came out of those four days of
programming yeah I listened to the
Justin bonds uh episode yesterday and
that was great job hosting great
conversation um very thought-provoking
um it was I learned a lot and anytime I
can learn anything after grinding here
for almost seven years uh I I really
appreciate that so uh the validated
podcast is has been a great forum and I
can't wait to dig through all the
episodes um and that's also something I
noticed um I live in Denver I'm in
Colorado I go to as many eth Denver as
possible and that was also something I
noticed in this year's event is the the
multi-chain focus you know near had a
day a whole day on the main stage um
there were teams that were hacking on
multiple different blockchains so it's
really cool to kind of see you
acknowledge that that that's kind of
expanding into the salana space and the
salana conference space um I it's it's
it's kind of what's keeping me bullish
um on this ecosystem moving forward and
so I don't think we necessarily have
enough time to really dig into this but
what are the levels of like
interoperability that at a foundational
level you guys are starting to maybe add
to your radar because it still sounds
like there's a lot of optimization and
internal work that you guys are focusing
on you know multi clients expanding your
validator set um providing these public
forums for people to meet when it comes
to like other ecosystems and maybe even
being able to make it possible for maker
to communicate e more easily between
ethereum and salana what's kind of the
perspective at a foundation level for
interoperability and where you see kind
of the puck going yeah I mean I think
between dbridge and Wormhole and a few
others like there's a very great
interconnectivity that exists between
salana and sort of all the major uh
other networks out there um there's a
good the folks at polymer Labs I think
are working on an IBC connector for for
the salana network as well into the
cosmos ecosystem um but you know folks
are already sort of doing that today one
of the core thesis of salana is an
execution layer environment and so what
that means is if you uh you know if you
want to trade Bitcoin you should trade
Bitcoin on salana because we have
threshold Network Bitcoin which is the
first truly decentralized um Bitcoin
that doesn't exist on the Bitcoin
Network right everything else is
centralized custody risk and that really
cool to see I think if you want to you
know buy ethereum you should potentially
consider buying it on salana because you
can buy it $20 at a time and you're not
paying 10% of that to gas fees uh you
know the AP coin airdrop should have
been on salana there's no reason to
spend $3,500 claiming an airdrop in
terms of gas fees on ethereum you should
just airdrop it on salana and then if
you want to migrate back over to
ethereum when gas fees are lower great
you can totally do that but this is kind
of where the execution environment play
of salana really starts to shine is it
can extend the functionality of other
networks um over time and you know at
the same time there are other networks
that extend the functionality of salana
right almost every nft on salana is
minted on R weave um R weave is a
decentralized storage Network and that's
really awesome to see storage on Salon
is pretty expensive so folks actually
mint the you know the image for an nft
on our weer the video uh there's a
collaboration between ipfs and a bunch
of folks in the salon ecosystem to
decentralize the long-term storage of
the Sal Ledger uh into ipfs the project
is called uh Old Faithful um which is an
extension of the geyser plugin hence
where the name comes from um but there's
a lot of you know potential
interoperability uh with specialized
application blockchains but I think as a
general compute Network which is what
salana is um you know it's a very strong
execution layer for whatever folks want
to build um I know and this will be the
final question um I know this is kind of
an unfair question because crypto time
moves so quickly and predicting where
crypto be will be in one year is an
impossible task let alone in 5 years but
um looking out five years now and um
what's your thesis for what blockchain
crypto web 3 mainstream adoption looks
like and how will uh the role that the
salana foundation plays in the salana
ecosystem help help Poise this
blockchain network for being able to
meet those needs so 5 years is actually
a pretty easy timeline I think to look
at on the salana network you will have
multiple concurrent block producers um
within a 5-year timeline I expect um
that stuff folks are already starting to
work on at the very least they'll be on
on testnet and this is kind of a really
important part of that long-term Vision
which is to make the network Fair open
access and and reduced latency around
the world and so having multiple current
block producers is a really good step in
that direction I think you will see um
the class of Enterprise blockchains
probably fizzling out I think very much
how in the early days uh it departments
thought they needed to run their own
email servers and they needed to run
fiber between all their offices and
eventually they're like you know what
Google and Microsoft can kind of run
these things for us and we can just use
the public Internet it's fine I think
you're going to see a very similar thing
as tooling improves and so companies
that are highly regulated are going to
say look we can use something like the
token 2022 standard on salana to create
regulated tokens that coexist with other
tokens like usdc and bonk and you know
whatever else dog money you want to use
um and that interacting with that token
may require kyc it may be transfer
restricted but that can coexist the same
way that you can have you know uh social
message social media on the internet
coexist with electronic medical record
systems it's all on the internet right
there's this idea that um in blockchain
everything is either totally private or
totally open and I think we're going to
we're going to see much more levels of
gradation over the next 5 years which is
going to lead to increased adoption um
the same way that the internet is not
any one technology it's a collection of
different technologies that exist in one
Global Information
System um I really appreciate how you
use uh the internet as kind of like the
base case for describing where we're
going at as uh blockchain infrastructure
becomes more and more apparent in the
average mainstream users's day-to-day
life um so I think enough of our
listeners probably know how to find
salana and where to find more
information about that so to wrap up um
what's the best place that folks can uh
listen to the validated pod or to learn
more about the podcast that you host
yeah uh podcast is called validated we
do two episodes a month that come out on
Tuesdays
uh there's a video version on YouTube
and then you can find the audio version
you know Spotify pocketcasts wherever
you get your podcasts awesome well um
Austin you are obviously very busy you
get to rub elbows with a lot of
important folks in the traditional and
the blockchain space so I really want to
thank you for sharing an hour of your
time with the smart economy podcast
today it was a fascinating discussion to
delve into salana um I personally had a
lot of fun doing my research on this
conversation and also just kind of like
following a lot of the really cool
things that have been happening over the
past couple months and uh eager to see
the progress that you your team and your
ecosystem make uh in the months coming
and in the Years coming so I want to
thank you so much for joining the smart
economy podcast yeah thanks for having
me on Cheers
you